20th/articles/rfc145.md, before:

<!--

  Copyright (C) 2020 Tobias Boege

  This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
  Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

 -->

# RFC 145, by Eric J. Roode: Brace-matching for Perl Regular Expressions

## Problem and proposal

The RFC 145 calls for a new regex mechanism to assist in matching paired
characters like parentheses, ensuring that they are balanced. There are
many "paired characters" in more or less daily use: `()`, `[]`, `{}`, `<>`,
`«»`, `""`, `''`, depending on your local even `»«`, or in the fancy world
of Unicode additionally `⟦⟧` and many, many more. In this article I will
take up the RFC's title and call all of them "braces".

For example consider the string `([b - (a + 1)] * 7)`. We might wish to
extract all the subformulas

- `[b - (a + 1)] * 7`,
- `b - (a + 1)`,
- `a + 1`

from it which are surrounded by a *matching pair* of braces using a global
match. The reader is invited to try to write such a regex now.

The RFC author [Eric Roode] notes that this was still quite difficult in
Perl in the year 2000. The task splits into two parts:

1. Determining for an opening bracket what is its closing counterpart.
2. Keeping track of the nesting levels and matching braces at each level.

The first subtask becomes hairy in a regex when there are multiple options
for the opening bracket. The second subtask is hard for a more profound
reason which goes by the name of "[Dyck language]". The Dyck language is
the set of all strings of properly paired parentheses (with hypothetical
contents between them erased). It is the prototypical example of a language
in the computer-science sense which is not regular but still context-free,
meaning that it somehow needs a stack to keep track of nesting levels.
Of course, regexes are more powerful than computer-scientific regular
expressions but this fact may still justify why this is a difficult thing
to do. Eric Roode recognized the gap between how easy this very common task
in parsing structured data **should be** and how easy it **is** and wrote
an RFC.

He proposed a pragma `use matchpairs` to solve subtask № 1 by providing a
map from opening to closing braces. Pragmas are activated in a lexical scope
and influence all regex matches in it. For subtask № 2 two new regex
metacharacters were proposed, `\m` and `\M` for matching and remembering
corresponding braces. Using these hooks, the nesting level business is
offloaded onto the regex engine.

[Eric Roode]: https://metacpan.org/author/ROODE
[Dyck Language]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dyck_language

## Spec and solution

RFC 145 is marked "developing", meaning that it was not fully addressed
in the Perl 6, and now Raku, specification. (Apocalypse 5 on pattern matching
includes a [response] to RFC 145.) But there have been related improvements
which I am going to use in this section to show how the problem posed in
the beginning might be handled in Raku today.

The idea of using a pragma to set up a table of valid braces and then
using "brace" regex metacharacters was not implemented, but the regex
language was to be redesigned anyway and the designers extrapolated from
brace matching and created a new regex operator for nesting structures,
[the tilde]. This operator is used like this:

``` raku
anon regex { '(' ~ ')' <body> }
```

and it achieves two things: it transposes body and closing brace so that
the two delimiters are close to each other, even when `<body>` is long,
and it sets up error reporting for when the closing brace was not found.

We can use this new feature to slightly improve the regex structure and
get error reporting for free, but it does **not** keep track of nesting
levels of the parentheses and it does **not** compute the closing brace
for us if there had been multiple options for the opening one.

To compute the closing brace, it would suffice to have a way to capture
the opening brace and pass it to a function whose return value is dynamically
interpolated into the regex. This is now easy in Raku [regexes] and
in particular `Grammar`s:

``` raku
grammar Formula {
    # Registry of understood braces.
    constant %braces =
        '(' => ')',
        '[' => ']',
        '{' => '}',
    ;

    # A parametric token which matches the closing brace
    # corresponding to its argument.
    token closing ($opening) {
        "%braces{$opening}"
    }

    rule braced {
        $<opening>=@(%braces.keys) ~ <closing($<opening>)>
          [ <expr> {} ]
    }

    rule expr {
        [ <:Letter>+ || <:Number>+ || <braced> ]+ % <[+*/-]>
    }
}
```

The crucial part is `rule braced`.¹ We capture the opening brace and then
later ask for its corresponding closing brace from a lookup in the `%braces`
map.² The `@(%braces.keys)` interpolation of a list invokes [longest-token matching],
so it will DWIM when multiple braces with overlapping prefixes are present.

Notice that the mutually recursive use of the `<expr>` and `<braced>`
rules ensures correct nesting of braces without needing a dedicated gear
for this in the regex engine. It falls out of Raku's improved regex
structuring and reusing facilities. It is time for a test:

``` raku
grammar Formula { … }
sub braced-subexprs ($expr) { … }

braced-subexprs Q|([b - (a + 1)] * 7)|;
```

``` console
-- ([b - (a + 1)] * 7) ---------------------------------------------------------
Braces: ( * ) ||| Subexpr: a + 1
Braces: [ * ] ||| Subexpr: b - (a + 1)
Braces: ( * ) ||| Subexpr: [b - (a + 1)] * 7
```

[the tilde]: https://docs.raku.org/language/regexes#index-entry-regex__tilde-_regex__~-Tilde_for_nesting_structures
[response]: https://raku.org/archive/doc/design/apo/A05.html#RFC%20145:%20Brace-matching%20for%20Perl%20Regular%20Expressions
[regexes]: https://docs.raku.org/language/regexes
[longest-token matching]: https://docs.raku.org/language/regexes#Quoted_lists_are_LTM_matches

## Encore!

That would be it for the main dish, but here is the dessert.
If, like me, you are slightly bothered by the static brace table but are fine
with heuristics, then the Unicode Consortium may be an unexpected ally. The
Unicode `Bidi_Mirroring_Glyph` property gives hints about bidirectional
writing, that is putting text on the screen when multiple scripts are
involved, some of which write left-to-right and others right-to-left.
Raku has built-in support for Unicode properties and we can use this one
to let the Unicode Consortium pick closing braces for us:

``` raku
    sub unicode-reverse ($_) {
        join '', .comb.reverse.map: {
            .uniprop('Bidi_Mirroring_Glyph')
                or .self
        }
    }

    token closing ($opening) {
        "{ unicode-reverse($opening) }"
    }

    regex braced {
        :sigspace
        $<opening>=<:Symbol + :Punctuation>+ ~ <closing($<opening>)>
        [ <expr> {} ]
    }
```

The `&unicode-reverse` heuristic splits the argument into characters,
reverses their order and then either picks its mirroring glyph, if one
is defined, or leaves the character as-is, then reassembles them into
a string. This function successfully turns `<{` into `}>`, for example.

`braced` was tweaked in two regards: it accepts any sequence of symbols
and punctuation as opening braces now and it has been turned into a
`regex` for full backtracking power when it is too greedy in consuming
opening braces.

With these tweaks, we can go nuts and have the grammar do the brace
matching analogue of free association:

``` console
-- ([b - (a + 1)] * 7) ---------------------------------------------------------
Braces: ( * ) ||| Subexpr: a + 1
Braces: [ * ] ||| Subexpr: b - (a + 1)
Braces: ( * ) ||| Subexpr: [b - (a + 1)] * 7

-- (=^123^=) -------------------------------------------------------------------
Braces: (=^ * ^=) ||| Subexpr: 123

-- <<<123>> --------------------------------------------------------------------
FAILED

-- >123< -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Braces: > * < ||| Subexpr: 123

-- >123> -----------------------------------------------------------------------
FAILED

-- <{ (a + <b>) / !c! / e * »~d~« }> -------------------------------------------
Braces: < * > ||| Subexpr: b
Braces: ( * ) ||| Subexpr: a + <b>
Braces: ! * ! ||| Subexpr: c
Braces: »~ * ~« ||| Subexpr: d
Braces: <{ * }> ||| Subexpr: (a + <b>) / !c! / e * »~d~«
```

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

The function used to report braced subexpressions is this:

``` raku
sub braced-subexprs ($expr) {
    # Get all submatches of the C<braced> subrule.
    class BracedCollector {
        has @.braced-subexprs;

        method braced ($/) {
            push @!braced-subexprs, $/
        }

        method braced-subexprs {
            @!braced-subexprs.unique(as => *.pos)
        }
    }

    say "-- $expr ", '-' x (76 - $expr.chars);

    my BracedCollector $collect .= new;
    say "FAILED" and return
        unless Formula.parse($expr, :rule<expr>, :actions($collect));

    for $collect.braced-subexprs -> $/ {
        say "Braces: $<opening> * $<closing> ||| Subexpr: $<expr>";
    }
}
```

¹ In case you are wondering about the use of an empty block in `[ <expr> {} ]`,
this is due to an implementation detail in Rakudo's regex engine which does
not make the capture `$<opening>` available to a later subrule `closing` unless
it is forced to. The empty block is one way to force it; cf.
[RT#111518](https://github.com/Raku/old-issue-tracker/issues/2662) and
[DOC#3478](https://github.com/Raku/doc/issues/3478).

² The essential feature of interpolating back the return value of a function
call `closing $<op>` which may depend on previous captures was added, to the
best of my knowledge, also around the year 2000 (so about the time this RFC
was posted), to Perl 5.6, in this case with the spelling `(??{closing $+{op}})`.

Commit message:

Add summary to RFC 145 article

20th/articles/rfc145.md, after:

<!--

  Copyright (C) 2020 Tobias Boege

  This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
  Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

 -->

# RFC 145, by Eric J. Roode: Brace-matching for Perl Regular Expressions

## Problem and proposal

The RFC 145 calls for a new regex mechanism to assist in matching paired
characters like parentheses, ensuring that they are balanced. There are
many "paired characters" in more or less daily use: `()`, `[]`, `{}`, `<>`,
`«»`, `""`, `''`, depending on your local even `»«`, or in the fancy world
of Unicode additionally `⟦⟧` and many, many more. In this article I will
take up the RFC's title and call all of them "braces".

For example consider the string `([b - (a + 1)] * 7)`. We might wish to
extract all the subformulas

- `[b - (a + 1)] * 7`,
- `b - (a + 1)`,
- `a + 1`

from it which are surrounded by a *matching pair* of braces using a global
match. The reader is invited to try to write such a regex now.

The RFC author [Eric Roode] notes that this was still quite difficult in
Perl in the year 2000. The task splits into two parts:

1. Determining for an opening bracket what is its closing counterpart.
2. Keeping track of the nesting levels and matching braces at each level.

The first subtask becomes hairy in a regex when there are multiple options
for the opening bracket. The second subtask is hard for a more profound
reason which goes by the name of "[Dyck language]". The Dyck language is
the set of all strings of properly paired parentheses (with hypothetical
contents between them erased). It is the prototypical example of a language
in the computer-science sense which is not regular but still context-free,
meaning that it somehow needs a stack to keep track of nesting levels.
Of course, regexes are more powerful than computer-scientific regular
expressions but this fact may still justify why this is a difficult thing
to do. Eric Roode recognized the gap between how easy this very common task
in parsing structured data **should be** and how easy it **is** and wrote
an RFC.

He proposed a pragma `use matchpairs` to solve subtask № 1 by providing a
map from opening to closing braces. Pragmas are activated in a lexical scope
and influence all regex matches in it. For subtask № 2 two new regex
metacharacters were proposed, `\m` and `\M` for matching and remembering
corresponding braces. Using these hooks, the nesting level business is
offloaded onto the regex engine.

[Eric Roode]: https://metacpan.org/author/ROODE
[Dyck Language]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dyck_language

## Spec and solution

RFC 145 is marked "developing", meaning that it was not fully addressed
in the Perl 6, and now Raku, specification. (Apocalypse 5 on pattern matching
includes a [response] to RFC 145.) But there have been related improvements
which I am going to use in this section to show how the problem posed in
the beginning might be handled in Raku today.

The idea of using a pragma to set up a table of valid braces and then
using "brace" regex metacharacters was not implemented, but the regex
language was to be redesigned anyway and the designers extrapolated from
brace matching and created a new regex operator for nesting structures,
[the tilde]. This operator is used like this:

``` raku
anon regex { '(' ~ ')' <body> }
```

and it achieves two things: it transposes body and closing brace so that
the two delimiters are close to each other, even when `<body>` is long,
and it sets up error reporting for when the closing brace was not found.

We can use this new feature to slightly improve the regex structure and
get error reporting for free, but it does **not** keep track of nesting
levels of the parentheses and it does **not** compute the closing brace
for us if there had been multiple options for the opening one.

To compute the closing brace, it would suffice to have a way to capture
the opening brace and pass it to a function whose return value is dynamically
interpolated into the regex. This is now easy in Raku [regexes] and [grammars]:

``` raku
grammar Formula {
    # Registry of understood braces.
    constant %braces =
        '(' => ')',
        '[' => ']',
        '{' => '}',
    ;

    # A parametric token which matches the closing brace
    # corresponding to its argument.
    token closing ($opening) {
        "%braces{$opening}"
    }

    rule braced {
        $<opening>=@(%braces.keys) ~ <closing($<opening>)>
          [ <expr> {} ]
    }

    rule expr {
        [ <:Letter>+ || <:Number>+ || <braced> ]+ % <[+*/-]>
    }
}
```

The crucial part is `rule braced`.¹ We capture the opening brace and then
later ask for its corresponding closing brace from a lookup in the `%braces`
map.² The `@(%braces.keys)` interpolation of a list invokes [longest-token matching],
so it will DWIM when multiple braces with overlapping prefixes are present.

Notice that the mutually recursive use of the `<expr>` and `<braced>`
rules ensures correct nesting of braces without needing a dedicated gear
for this in the regex engine. It falls out of Raku's improved regex
structuring and reusing facilities. It is time for a test:

``` raku
grammar Formula { … }
sub braced-subexprs ($expr) { … }

braced-subexprs Q|([b - (a + 1)] * 7)|;
```

``` console
-- ([b - (a + 1)] * 7) ---------------------------------------------------------
Braces: ( * ) ||| Subexpr: a + 1
Braces: [ * ] ||| Subexpr: b - (a + 1)
Braces: ( * ) ||| Subexpr: [b - (a + 1)] * 7
```

[the tilde]: https://docs.raku.org/language/regexes#index-entry-regex__tilde-_regex__~-Tilde_for_nesting_structures
[response]: https://raku.org/archive/doc/design/apo/A05.html#RFC%20145:%20Brace-matching%20for%20Perl%20Regular%20Expressions
[regexes]: https://docs.raku.org/language/regexes
[grammars]: https://docs.raku.org/language/grammars
[longest-token matching]: https://docs.raku.org/language/regexes#Quoted_lists_are_LTM_matches

## Summary

In summary, brace matching is obviously useful in parsing structured data.
It was proposed by Eric Roode to make this simple in Perl 6 / Raku. Although
the feature was not implemented in the proposed form, the task has indeed
become easier to accomplish and the code much easier to read, notably due
to the new regex syntax and grammar support.

### Encore!

If, like me, you are slightly bothered by the static brace table but are fine
with heuristics, then the Unicode Consortium may be an unexpected ally. The
Unicode `Bidi_Mirroring_Glyph` property gives hints about bidirectional
writing, that is putting text on the screen when multiple scripts are
involved, some of which write left-to-right and others right-to-left.
Raku has built-in support for Unicode properties and we can use this one
to let the Unicode Consortium pick closing braces for us:

``` raku
    sub unicode-mirror ($_) {
        join '', .comb.reverse.map: {
            .uniprop('Bidi_Mirroring_Glyph')
                or .self
        }
    }

    token closing ($opening) {
        "{ unicode-mirror($opening) }"
    }

    regex braced {
        :sigspace
        $<opening>=<:Symbol + :Punctuation>+ ~ <closing($<opening>)>
        [ <expr> {} ]
    }
```

The `&unicode-mirror` heuristic splits the argument into characters,
reverses their order and then either picks its mirroring glyph, if one
is defined, or leaves the character as-is, then reassembles them into
a string. This function successfully turns `<{` into `}>`, for example.

`braced` was tweaked in two regards: it accepts any sequence of symbols
and punctuation as opening braces now and it has been turned into a
`regex` for full backtracking power when it is too greedy in consuming
opening braces.

With these tweaks, we can go nuts and have the grammar do free association
and match everything that "looks like a brace pair":

``` console
-- ([b - (a + 1)] * 7) ---------------------------------------------------------
Braces: ( * ) ||| Subexpr: a + 1
Braces: [ * ] ||| Subexpr: b - (a + 1)
Braces: ( * ) ||| Subexpr: [b - (a + 1)] * 7

-- (=^123^=) -------------------------------------------------------------------
Braces: (=^ * ^=) ||| Subexpr: 123

-- <<<123>> --------------------------------------------------------------------
FAILED

-- >123< -----------------------------------------------------------------------
Braces: > * < ||| Subexpr: 123

-- >123> -----------------------------------------------------------------------
FAILED

-- <{ (a + <b>) / !c! / e * »~d~« }> -------------------------------------------
Braces: < * > ||| Subexpr: b
Braces: ( * ) ||| Subexpr: a + <b>
Braces: ! * ! ||| Subexpr: c
Braces: »~ * ~« ||| Subexpr: d
Braces: <{ * }> ||| Subexpr: (a + <b>) / !c! / e * »~d~«
```

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

The function used to report braced subexpressions is this:

``` raku
sub braced-subexprs ($expr) {
    # Get all submatches of the C<braced> subrule.
    class BracedCollector {
        has @.braced-subexprs;

        method braced ($/) {
            push @!braced-subexprs, $/
        }

        method braced-subexprs {
            @!braced-subexprs.unique(as => *.pos)
        }
    }

    say "-- $expr ", '-' x (76 - $expr.chars);

    my BracedCollector $collect .= new;
    say "FAILED" and return
        unless Formula.parse($expr, :rule<expr>, :actions($collect));

    for $collect.braced-subexprs -> $/ {
        say "Braces: $<opening> * $<closing> ||| Subexpr: $<expr>";
    }
}
```

¹ In case you are wondering about the use of an empty block in `[ <expr> {} ]`,
this is due to an implementation detail in Rakudo's regex engine which does
not make the capture `$<opening>` available to a later subrule `closing` unless
it is forced to. The empty block is one way to force it; cf.
[RT#111518](https://github.com/Raku/old-issue-tracker/issues/2662) and
[DOC#3478](https://github.com/Raku/doc/issues/3478).

² The essential feature of interpolating back the return value of a function
call `closing $<op>` which may depend on previous captures was added, to the
best of my knowledge, also around the year 2000 (so about the time this RFC
was posted), to Perl 5.6, in this case with the spelling `(??{closing $+{op}})`.
