<!--

  Copyright (C) 2020 Tobias Boege

  This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
  Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

 -->

# RFC 190, by Damian Conway: Objects : NEXT pseudoclass for method redispatch

In his series of object orientation RFC's Perl/Raku luminary [Damian Conway]
includes a proposal for method redispatch, [RFC 190], which is the subject
of today's article.

## On method dispatch

Perl has a pseudoclass named `SUPER` which an object can use to invoke a
method of its parent class that it has overridden. It looks approximately
like this:
``` perl
sub dump_info {
    my $self = shift;           # obtain invocant
    $self->SUPER::dump_info;    # first dump parent
    say $self->{derived_info};  # then ourselves
}
```
In this example, taken loosely from the RFC, we define a method `dump_info`
in a derived class which dumps the info of its parent class and then anything
that itself added to the object, exemplified by the `derived_info` attribute.
Conway notes that this breaks down under **multiple inheritance** because
`SUPER` will only dispatch to the first parent class of `$self` and once
you go `SUPER` you [can't go back](https://perldoc.pl/perlobj#How-SUPER-is-Resolved).
Supposing that all `dump_info` methods in parent classes are similarly
implemented, only the family bonds indicated in the below diagram with
double lines would be traversed, resulting in lots of info potentially
undumped:

```
Grand11  Grand12      Grand21  Grand22
   ║        │            │        │
   ╟────────┘            ├────────┘
   ║                     │
Parent1               Parent2
   ║                     │
   ╟─────────────────────┘
   ║
Derived
```

One might think that to get this right, each class needs to dispatch to all
of its parent classes somehow, which would be akin to a [post-order traversal]
of the inheritance tree. This is correct insofar as it models the *relevance*
of methods in the inheritance tree, supposing that left parents are more
important than right ones.

[Damian Conway]: http://damian.conway.org/
[RFC 190]: https://raku.org/archive/rfc/190.html
[post-order traversal]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tree_traversal#Post-order_(LRN)

## The NEXT pseudoclass

Conway's proposal is subtly different. Namely, he proposes to add a new
pseudoclass named `NEXT` which is to be used just like `SUPER` above and
which should, instead of continuing in the parent of the current package,
resume the original method dispatch process with the next appropriate
candidate as if the current one had not existed. Then, method redispatch
is performed with respect to the original object's class and sees the
entire inheritance tree instead of cutting off all other branches below
`SUPER`. Effectively, this offloads the responsibility of redispatching
from each specific class onto the runtime method dispatch mechanism.

```
Grand11══Grand12══╗   Grand21══Grand22
   ║        │     ║      ║        │
   ╟────────┘     ║      ╟────────┘
   ║              ║      ║
Parent1           ╚═══Parent2
   ║                     │
   ╟─────────────────────┘
   ║
Derived
```

Concretely, when calling `dump_info` on an object blessed into the `Derived`
class, there is an array of possible candidates. They are the methods of the
same name of `Derived`, `Parent1`, `Grand11`, `Grand12`, `Parent2`, `Grand21`
and `Grand22`, in order of relevance. Given this array, each `dump_info`
implementation just has to redispatch to the single **next** method in line.
It is on the runtime to keep enough data around to continue the dispatch
chain.

Notably, this mechanism can also provide an implementation of [RFC 8],
which is about the special method `AUTOLOAD`. `AUTOLOAD` is called as a
fallback when some method name could not be resolved. Redispatching via
`NEXT` can be used to *decline* to autoload a method in the current class
and leave that task to another `AUTOLOAD` in the inheritance tree.

[RFC 8]: https://raku.org/archive/rfc/8.html

## The Raku implementation

While the status of RFC 190 is "frozen", hence accepted, this feature looks
different in Raku today. There is no `NEXT` and even `SUPER` is gone.
Instead we have three types of [redispatch keywords]:

- [`callsame`], [`callwith`]: calls the next candidate for the method, either
  using the **same** arguments or **with** the other, given ones.
- [`nextsame`], [`nextwith`]: the same as as the `call*` keywords, except
  they do not return control to the current method.
- [`samewith`]: calls the same candidate again with different arguments.

`callsame` and `callwith` implement the process that `NEXT` would have,
but in the wider context of all dispatch-related goodies that Raku got.
They work in all places that have a linearized hierarchy of "callable
candidates". This includes redispatch of methods along the inheritance
tree, it naturally includes candidates for [multi methods and subs],
it includes [`FALLBACK`] \(erstwhile `AUTOLOAD`) and [wrapped routines].
Another speciality is in case you ever find you have to redispatch from the
current method but do so in another context, for example inside a [Promise],
then the [`nextcallee`] keyword can be used to obtain a Callable which can
continue the dispatch process from anywhere.

We change `NEXT::` → `callsame` and after some localizations, our
`dump_info` method looks like this and does not omit any parent class's
methods anymore:

``` raku
method dump-info {
    callsame;            # first dump next
    put $!derived-info;  # then ourselves
}
```

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In summary, being able to redispatch to a parent class's method is useful.
In a situation with multiple inheritance and multi subs, the fixation on
the "parent class" is less helpful and is replaced by "less specific method".
Conway's proposal to redispatch to the next less specific method made it
into Raku and its usefulness is amplified way beyond the RFC by other Raku
features and the careful design connecting them.

Curiously, a [NEXT module] was first shipped as a core module with Perl
v5.7.3, released in 2002, written by... Damian Conway.
<!-- Also note that the `samewith` keyword is known in Perl as `__SUB__` since v5.16. -->

[redispatch keywords]: https://docs.raku.org/language/functions#Re-dispatching
[`callsame`]: https://docs.raku.org/language/functions#sub_callsame
[`callwith`]: https://docs.raku.org/language/functions#sub_callwith
[`nextsame`]: https://docs.raku.org/language/functions#sub_nextsame
[`nextwith`]: https://docs.raku.org/language/functions#sub_nextwith
[`samewith`]: https://docs.raku.org/language/functions#sub_samewith
[`nextcallee`]: https://docs.raku.org/language/functions#sub_nextcallee
[multi methods and subs]: https://docs.raku.org/language/functions#Multi-dispatch
[`FALLBACK`]: https://docs.raku.org/language/typesystem#index-entry-FALLBACK_(method)
[wrapped routines]: https://docs.raku.org/language/functions#index-entry-dispatch_wrapped_routines
[Promise]: https://docs.raku.org/type/Promise
[NEXT module]: https://perldoc.pl/NEXT

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

### There is more than one way to dump info

For the particular pattern used as an example in the RFC, where each class
in the inheritance tree independently throws in its own bit, there is
another way in Raku to accomplish the same as redispatch. This is the
method call operator [`.*`](https://docs.raku.org/language/operators#methodop_.*)
(or its greedy variant [`.+`](https://docs.raku.org/language/operators#methodop_.+)).
Consider

``` raku
# Parent and grandparent classes look the same...

class Derived is Parent1 is Parent2 {
    sub dump-info { put "Derived" }
}
```

Each `dump-info` method is only concerned with its own info and does not
redispatch. The [`.*` methodop] walks the candidate chain and calls all
of them, returning a list of return values (although in this case we care
only about the side effect of printing to screen):

``` raku
Derived.new.*dump-info
# Derived
# Parent1
# Grand11
# Grand12
# Parent2
# Grand21
# Grand22
```

The methods are called from most to least relevant, in pre-order of the
inheritance tree. This way we can keep our `dump-info` methods oblivious
to redispatch, whereas explicitly redispatching using `callsame` and co.
would allow us to choose between pre- and post-order.

[`.*` methodop]: https://docs.raku.org/language/operators#methodop_.*
