# RFC 200, by Nathan Wiger: Revamp tie to support extensibility

Proposed on 7 September 2000, frozen on 20 September 2000, depends on
[RFC 159: True Polymorphic Objects](https://raku.org/archive/rfc/159.html)
proposed on 25 August 2000, frozen on 16 September 2000, also by *Nathan Wiger*
and [already blogged about earlier](https://raku-advent.blog/2020/08/17/rfc-159-by-nathan-wiger-true-polymorphic-objects/).

## What is `tie` anyway?

[RFC 200](https://raku.org/archive/rfc/200.html) was about extending the
[tie](https://perldoc.perl.org/5.32.0//functions/tie.html) functionality
as offered by Perl.

This functionality in Perl allows one to *inject* program logic into the
system's handling of scalars, arrays and hashes, among other things.  This
is done by assigning the name of a package to a data-structure such as an
array (aka *tying*).  That package is then expected to provide a number of
subroutines (e.g. `FETCH` and `STORE`) that will be called by the system
to achieve certain effects on the given data-structure.

As such, it is used by some of Perl's core modules, such as
[threads](https://perldoc.perl.org/5.32.0/threads.html), and many
modules on CPAN, such as [Tie::File](https://metacpan.org/pod/Tie::File).
The `tie` functionality of Perl still suffers from the problems mentioned
in the RFC.

## It's *all* tied

In Raku, *everything* is an object, or can be considered to be an object.
Everything the system needs to do with an object, is done through its
methods.  In that sense, you could say that *everything* in Raku is a
`tied` object.  Fortunately, Rakudo (the most advanced implementation of
the Raku Programming Language) can recognize when certain methods on an
object are in fact the ones supplied by the system, and actually
create short-cuts at compile time (e.g. when assigning to a variable
that has a standard container: it won't actually call a `STORE` method,
but uses an internal subroutine to achieve the desired effect).

But apart from that, Rakudo has the capability of identifying hot code
paths *during execution* of a program, and optimize these in real time.
> *Jonathan Worthington* gave two very nice presentations about this
process: [How does deoptimization help us go faster](http://jnthn.net/papers/2017-spw-deopt.pdf)
from 2017, and a [Performance Update](http://jnthn.net/papers/2019-perlcon-performance.pdf)
from 2019.

*Because* everything in Raku is an object and access occurs through
the methods of the classes of these objects, allows the compiler and
the runtime to have a much better grasp of what is actually going on
in a program.  Which in turn gives better optimization capabilities,
even down to machine language level at some point.

And because everything is "tied" in Raku (using Perl-filtered glasses),
injecting program logic into the system's handling of arrays and hashes,
can be as simple as subclassing the system's class and providing a
special version of one of the standard methods as used by the system.
Suppose you want to see in your program when an element is fetched
from an array:

    class VerboseFetcher is Array {    # subclass core's Array class
        method AT-POS($pos) {           # method for fetching an element
            say "fetching #$pos";        # tell the world
            nextsame                     # provide standard functionality
        }
    }
    
    my @a is VerboseFetcher = 1,2,3;   # mark as special and initialize
    say @a[1];  # fetching #1â¤2

The Raku documentation contains an overview of which methods need to be
supplied [to emulate an `Array`](https://docs.raku.org/language/subscripts#Methods_to_implement_for_positional_subscripting)
and [to emulate a `Hash`](https://docs.raku.org/language/subscripts#Methods_to_implement_for_associative_subscripting).
By the way, the whole lemma about
[accessing data structure elements by index or key](https://docs.raku.org/language/subscripts)
is recommended reading for someone wanting to grok those aspects of the
internals of Raku.

## Nothing is special

In a blog post [about RFC 168](https://raku-advent.blog/2020/08/07/rfc-168-by-johan-vromans-built-in-functions-should-be-functions/)
about making things less special, it was already mentioned that really
nothing is special in Raku.  And that (almost) all aspects of the language
can by altered in a lexical scope.  So what the above example did to the
`Array` class, can be done to *any* of Raku's core classes, or any other
classes that have been installed from the ecosystem, or that you have
written yourself.

But it can be overwhelming to have to supply all of the logic needed to
fully emulate an array or a hash.  Especially when you first try to do
this.  Therefore the ecosystem actually has two modules with roles
that help you with that:

- [Array::Agnostic](https://modules.raku.org/dist/Array::Agnostic)
- [Hash::Agnostic](https://modules.raku.org/dist/Hash::Agnostic)

Both modules only require you to implement 5 methods in a class that
does these roles to get the full functionality of an array or a
hash, completely customized to your liking.

In fact, the flexibility of the approach of Raku towards customizability
of the language, actually allowed the
[implementation of Perl's `tie` built-in function](https://modules.raku.org/dist/P5tie)
in Raku.  So if you're porting code from Perl to Raku, and the code in
question uses `tie`, you can use this module as a quick intermediate
solution.

## Conclusion

Let's look at the problems that people mentioned with `tie` in RFC 200:

> 1. It is non-extensible; you are limited to using functions that have been implemented with tie hooks in them already.

Raku is completely extensible and pluggable in (almost) all aspects of
its implementation.

> 2. Any additional functions require mixed calls to tied and OO interfaces, defeating a chief goal: transparency.

All interfaces use methods in Raku.  Use of classes and methods should
be clear to any programmer using Raku.

> 3. It is slow. Very slow, in fact.

In Raku, it is all the same speed during execution.  And every
customization profits from the same optimization features like every
other piece of code in Raku.  And will be, in the end, optimized down
to machine code when possible.

> 4. You can't easily integrate tie and operator overloading.

In Raku, operators are multi-dispatch subroutines that allow additional
candidates for custom classes to be added.

> 5. If defining tied and OO interfaces, you must define duplicate functions or use typeglobs.

Typeglobs don't exist in Raku.  All interfacing in Raku is done by
supplying additional methods (or subroutines in case of operators).
No duplication of effort is needed, so no such problem.

> 6. Some parts of the syntax are, well, kludgey

One may argue that the kludgey syntax of Perl has been replaced by
another kludgey syntax in Raku.  That is probably in the eye of the
beholder.  Fact is that the syntax in Raku for injecting program
logic, is not different from any other subclassing or role mixins
one would otherwise do in Raku.

Nothing from RFC 159 actually was implemented in the way it was
originally suggested.  However, solutions to the problems mentioned
have **all** been implemented in Raku.
