raku-advent-2025/authors.md, before:

# Raku Advent Calendar 2025 authors and articles.

Please add your name (IRC #raku nickname preferred) and topic or
topics (if you want to write more than one article).

Your article will need to be **ready and posted** as a draft in
this repository, in a gist or in the
[Raku Advent Calendar](https://raku-advent.blog) site if you
already have permissions, by
**December 1st 2025**,
and it will be scheduled the most convenient day by the calendar
editors.

Please also send an easy and fast way to contact you to liz at raku.rocks and librasteve at furnival.net. It will be used mainly for
reminders.

1. nige: Dancer, Dasher and Dosh (DO SHell) - LLM-powered shell commands - published
2. antononcube: Doing Data Science with Raku - published
3. librasteve: Christmas Crunching Part I - published
4. morayj: Create your own 2026 PDF journal - published
5. marcel: Tools for Gnome::Gtk4 - published
6. antononcube: Robust code generation combining grammars and LLMs - published
7. lizmat: Allowing for fewer dollars - scheduled
8. librasteve: HARC the Herald Angels Sing Part I
9. antononcube: Monadic programming examples
10. tbrowder: Santa's Finance Department
11. arunvickram: Touch the Stars with DataStar
12. yourname: Your Title
13. ..
14. ..  
15. ..
16. ..
17. ..
18. ..
19. ..
20. ..
21. ..
22. ..
23. antononcube: Whose has the better highlighter now?
24. ..
25. lizmat: Raku 2025 Review

Commit message:

Adding ab5tract to the 2025 advent schedule

raku-advent-2025/authors.md, after:

# Raku Advent Calendar 2025 authors and articles.

Please add your name (IRC #raku nickname preferred) and topic or
topics (if you want to write more than one article).

Your article will need to be **ready and posted** as a draft in
this repository, in a gist or in the
[Raku Advent Calendar](https://raku-advent.blog) site if you
already have permissions, by
**December 1st 2025**,
and it will be scheduled the most convenient day by the calendar
editors.

Please also send an easy and fast way to contact you to liz at raku.rocks and librasteve at furnival.net. It will be used mainly for
reminders.

1. nige: Dancer, Dasher and Dosh (DO SHell) - LLM-powered shell commands - published
2. antononcube: Doing Data Science with Raku - published
3. librasteve: Christmas Crunching Part I - published
4. morayj: Create your own 2026 PDF journal - published
5. marcel: Tools for Gnome::Gtk4 - published
6. antononcube: Robust code generation combining grammars and LLMs - published
7. lizmat: Allowing for fewer dollars - scheduled
8. librasteve: HARC the Herald Angels Sing Part I
9. antononcube: Monadic programming examples
10. tbrowder: Santa's Finance Department
11. arunvickram: Touch the Stars with DataStar
12. ab5tract: Feeds For Fun and Joy
13. yourname: Your Title
14. ..  
15. ..
16. ..
17. ..
18. ..
19. ..
20. ..
21. ..
22. ..
23. antononcube: Whose has the better highlighter now?
24. ..
25. lizmat: Raku 2025 Review
