raku-advent-2024/authors.md, before:

# Raku Advent Calendar 2024 authors and articles.

Please add your name (IRC #raku nickname preferred) and topic or
topics (if you want to write more than one article).

Your article will need to be **ready and posted** as a draft in
this repository, in a gist or in the
[Raku Advent Calendar](https://raku-advent.blog) site if you
already have permissions, by
**December 1st 2024**,
and it will be scheduled the most convenient day by the calendar
editors.

Please also send an easy and fast way to contact you to liz at raku.rocks. It will be used mainly for
reminders.

1. finanalyst: Rendering down for Christmas (published)
2. nige: WAT LLM coding tool do you want for Christmas? (published)
3. librasteve: Merry Cromas (scheduled)
4. antononcube: Don't use Forsyth-Edwards Notation to play chess with LLMs
5. coleman: Generating an HTML dashboard with Raku (scheduled)
6. codesections: How to give a Raku presentation at TPRC – and why you should
7. rogue/landyacht: Conditionally Writeable Attributes
8. nahita: Yet More Abilities for Iterables (scheduled)
9. martimm: The end of the year (scheduled)
10. lizmat: Hypering away by all methods
11. ohnowendigo: Counting up concurrency (scheduled)
12. antononcube: Graphs in Raku
13. massa: Counting Votes - but not really, just download the numbers
14. hythm: Content Storage For Raku Distributions (scheduled)
15. ab5tract: Revision Gating for API Evolution and Continuity
16. pheix: Step-by-Step with Raku – mastering KZG commitments and Ethereum v3 transactions
17. massa: Using RakuChatbook as my REPL
18. tbrowder: Santa's Print Shop
19. samebchase: Creating a presentation hosted on a Gemini capsule (scheduled)
20. antononcube: Chebyshev polynomials and fitting workflows
21. librasteve: Happy TM Xmas
22. finanalyst: Playing around with the new documentation components (scheduled)
23.
24.
25. lizmat: Raku 2024 Review

Commit message:

Add donaldh for day 24 to authors.md (#123)

raku-advent-2024/authors.md, after:

# Raku Advent Calendar 2024 authors and articles.

Please add your name (IRC #raku nickname preferred) and topic or
topics (if you want to write more than one article).

Your article will need to be **ready and posted** as a draft in
this repository, in a gist or in the
[Raku Advent Calendar](https://raku-advent.blog) site if you
already have permissions, by
**December 1st 2024**,
and it will be scheduled the most convenient day by the calendar
editors.

Please also send an easy and fast way to contact you to liz at raku.rocks. It will be used mainly for
reminders.

1. finanalyst: Rendering down for Christmas (published)
2. nige: WAT LLM coding tool do you want for Christmas? (published)
3. librasteve: Merry Cromas (scheduled)
4. antononcube: Don't use Forsyth-Edwards Notation to play chess with LLMs
5. coleman: Generating an HTML dashboard with Raku (scheduled)
6. codesections: How to give a Raku presentation at TPRC – and why you should
7. rogue/landyacht: Conditionally Writeable Attributes
8. nahita: Yet More Abilities for Iterables (scheduled)
9. martimm: The end of the year (scheduled)
10. lizmat: Hypering away by all methods
11. ohnowendigo: Counting up concurrency (scheduled)
12. antononcube: Graphs in Raku
13. massa: Counting Votes - but not really, just download the numbers
14. hythm: Content Storage For Raku Distributions (scheduled)
15. ab5tract: Revision Gating for API Evolution and Continuity
16. pheix: Step-by-Step with Raku – mastering KZG commitments and Ethereum v3 transactions
17. massa: Using RakuChatbook as my REPL
18. tbrowder: Santa's Print Shop
19. samebchase: Creating a presentation hosted on a Gemini capsule (scheduled)
20. antononcube: Chebyshev polynomials and fitting workflows
21. librasteve: Happy TM Xmas
22. finanalyst: Playing around with the new documentation components (scheduled)
23.
24. donaldh: In Search of the Essence of Raku
25. lizmat: Raku 2024 Review
